[MRG] revise `sourmash tax` user experience and output formats (#2158)
sourmash-bio/sourmash: doc/tutorial-lemonade.md

# Analyzing the genomic and taxonomic composition of an environmental genome using GTDB and sample-specific MAGs with sourmash

> C. Titus Brown, Taylor Reiter, and Tessa Pierce

Reviewer: ```suggestion
C. Titus Brown, Taylor Reiter, and Tessa Pierce Ward
```

```
will show you:
```
>ident,superkingdom,phylum,class,order,family,genus,species
>GCF_000566285.1,d__Bacteria,p__Proteobacteria,c__Gammaproteobacteria,o__Enterobacterales,f__Enterobacteriaceae,g__Escherichia,s__Escherichia coli
```

Let's index the taxonomy database using SQLite, for faster access later on:
```
sourmash tax prepare -t gtdb-rs207.taxonomy.csv \
    -o gtdb-rs207.taxonomy.sqldb -F sql
```
This creates a file `gtdb-rs207.taxonomy.sqldb` that contains all the information in the CSV file, but which is faster to load than the CSV file.

## Download and prepare sample reads

Next, let's download one of the metagenomes from [the assembly and binning tutorial](https://github.com/mblstamps/stamps2022/blob/main/assembly_and_binning/tutorial_assembly_and_binning.md#retrieving-the-data).

We'll use sample SRR8859675 for today, and you can view sample info [here](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/SRR8859675?show=reads) on the ENA.

To download the metagenome from the ENA, run:
```
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR885/005/SRR8859675/SRR8859675_1.fastq.gz
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR885/005/SRR8859675/SRR8859675_2.fastq.gz
```

> Now we're going to prepare the metagenome for use with sourmash by converting it into a _signature files_ containing _sketches_ of the k-mers in the metagenome. This is the step that "shreds" all of the reads into k-mers of size 31, and then does further data reduction by [sketching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Streaming_algorithm) the resulting k-mers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we're going to prepare the metagenome for use with sourmash by converting it into a _signature file_ containing _sketches_ of the k-mers in the metagenome. This is the step that "shreds" all of the reads into k-mers of size 31, and then does further data reduction by [sketching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Streaming_algorithm) the resulting k-mers.
```

## Find matching genomes with `sourmash gather`

At last, we have the ingredients we need to analyze the metagenome against GTDB!
* the software is installed
* the GTDB database is downloaded
* the metagenome is downloaded and sketched

Now, we'll run the [sourmash gather](https://sourmash.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command-line.html#sourmash-gather-find-metagenome-members) command to find matching genomes.

Run gather - this will take ~6 minutes:
```
sourmash gather SRR8859675.sig.gz gtdb-rs207.genomic-reps.dna.k31.zip --save-matches matches.zip
```
Here we are saving the matching genome sketches to `matches.zip` so we can rerun the analysis if we like.

The results will look like this:
```
overlap     p_query p_match avg_abund
---------   ------- ------- ---------
2.0 Mbp        0.4%   31.8%       1.3    GCF_004138165.1 Candidatus Chloroploc...
1.9 Mbp        0.5%   66.9%       2.1    GCF_900101955.1 Desulfuromonas thioph...
0.6 Mbp        0.3%   23.3%       3.2    GCA_016938795.1 Chromatiaceae bacteri...
0.6 Mbp        0.5%   27.3%       6.6    GCA_016931495.1 Chlorobiaceae bacteri...
...
found 22 matches total;
the recovered matches hit 5.3% of the abundance-weighted query
```

> which we discussed a little bit in lecture. Just to revisit,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this output:
```

* the last column is the name of the matching GTDB genome

> * the first column is the estimated overlap between the metagenome and that genome, in number of k-mers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the first column is the estimated overlap between the metagenome and that genome, in base pairs (estimated from shared k-mers)
```

> * the second column, `p_query` is the percentage of metagenome k-mers (weighted by multiplicity) that match to the genome; this will approximate the percentage of _metagenome reads_ that will map to this genome, if you map.

Reviewer: I don't yet like "multiplicity" but understand it is a more precise description than "k-mer count/abundance"

* the third column, `p_match`, is the percentage of the genome k-mers that are matched by the metagenome; this will approximate the percentage of _genome bases_ that will be covered by mapped reads;

> * the fourth column is the estimated abundance of this genome in the metagenome.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the fourth column is the estimated mean abundance of this genome in the metagenome.
```

This number is also a big underestimate of the "true" number for the metagenome - we'll explain more later :)
```

## Build a taxonomic summary of the metagenome

We can use these matching genomes to build a taxonomic summary of the metagenome using [sourmash tax metagenome](https://sourmash.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command-line.html#sourmash-tax-subcommands-for-integrating-taxonomic-information-into-gather-results) like so:

```
# rerun gather, save the results to a CSV
sourmash gather SRR8859675.sig.gz matches.zip -o SRR8859675.x.gtdb.csv

# use tax metagenome to classify the metagenome
sourmash tax metagenome -g SRR8859675.x.gtdb.csv \
    -t gtdb-rs207.taxonomy.sqldb -F human -r order
```
this shows you the rank, taxonomic lineage, and weighted fraction of the metagenome at the 'order' rank.

At the bottom, we have a script to plot the resulting taxonomy using [metacoder](https://grunwaldlab.github.io/metacoder_documentation/) - here's what it looks like:

![metacoder output](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mblstamps/stamps2022/main/kmers_and_sourmash/metacoder_gather.png)

> ## Interlude: why reference based analyses are problematic for environmental metagenomes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Interlude: why reference-based analyses are problematic for environmental metagenomes
```

> During the lecture, I showed you some preliminary data suggesting that really only a few types of metagenomes have high classification rates against Genbank. This is an environmental metagenome, and you can see that we're estimating only 5.3% of it will map to GTDB reference genomes!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reference-based metagenome classification is highly dependent on the organisms present in our reference databases.
For well-studied environments, such as human-associated microbiomes, your classification percentage is likely to be quite high.
In contrast, this is an environmental metagenome, and you can see that we're estimating only 5.3% of it will map to GTDB reference genomes!
```

Wow, that's **terrible**! Our taxonomic and/or functional analysis will be based on only 1/20th of the data!

What could we do to improve that?? There are two basic options -

(1) Use a more complete reference database, like the entire GTDB, or Genbank. This will only get you so far, unfortunately. (See exercises at end.)
(2) Assemble and bin the metagenome to produce new reference genomes!

> There are other things you could think about doing here, too, but these are probably the "easiest" options. And what's super cool is that we've already _done_ the second one. So can we include that in the analysis??

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are other things you could think about doing here, too, but these are probably the "easiest" options. And what's super cool is that we did the second one as part of [Taylor Reiter's STAMPS 2022 tutorial on assembly and binning](https://github.com/mblstamps/stamps2022/blob/main/assembly_and_binning/tutorial_assembly_and_binning.md). So can we include that in the analysis??
```

(4) some of what's in the metagenome k-mers may simply be erroneous (although with abundance weighting, this is likely to be a small chunk of things)

## Classify the taxonomy of the MAGs; update metagenome classification

Now we can also classify the genomes and update the taxonomic summary of the metagenome!

First, classify the genomes using GTDB; this will use trace overlaps between contigs in the MAGs and GTDB genomes to tentatively identify the _entire_ bin.
```
for i in MAG*.fasta.sig
do
    # get 'MAG' prefix. => NAME
    NAME=$(basename $i .fasta.sig)
    # search against GTDB
    echo sourmash gather $i gtdb-rs207.genomic-reps.dna.k31.zip \
        --threshold-bp=5000 \
        -o ${NAME}.x.gtdb.csv
done | parallel
```
(This will take about a minute.)

Here, we're using a for loop and [GNU parallel](https://www.gnu.org/software/parallel/) to classify the three genomes in parallel.

If you scan the results quickly, you'll see that one MAG has matches in genus Prosthecochloris, another MAG has matches to Chlorobaculum, and one has matches to Candidatus Moranbacteria.

> Let's classify them "officially" using sourmash and an average nucleotide identify threshold of 0.8 -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's classify them "officially" using sourmash and an average nucleotide identity threshold of 0.8 -
```

Why? 

Some thoughts and answers

It _could_ be that the GTDB genome is full of errors, and those errors are shared with the metagenome, and assembly is squashing those errors. Yay!

But this is extremely unlikely... This GTDB genome was built and validated entirely independently from this sample...

It's much more likely (IMO) that one of two things is happening:

(1) this sample is at low abundance in the metagenome, and assembly can only recover parts of it.
(2) this sample contains _several_ strain variants of this genome, and assembly is squashing the strain variation, because that's what assembly does.

Note, you can try the above with another one of the top gather matches and you'll see it's *entirely* lost in the process of assembly -
```
sourmash sig cat matches.zip --include GCF_004138165.1 -o GCF_004138165.sig
sourmash search --containment GCF_004138165.sig \
    SRR8859675*.sig* \
    --ignore-abund --threshold=0
```

## Summary and concluding thoughts

Above, we demonstrated a _reference-based_ analysis of shotgun metagenome data using sourmash.

> We then _updated our references_ from the MAGS produced from assembly and binning tutorial, which increased our classification rate substantially.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then _updated our references_ using the MAGs produced from assembly and binning tutorial, which increased our classification rate substantially.
```

Last but not least, we looked at the loss of k-mer information due to metagenome assembly.

All of these results were based on 31-mer overlap and containment - k-mers FTW!

A few points:

* We would have gotten slightly different results using k=21 or k=51; more of the metagenome would have been classified with k=21, while the classification results would have been more closely specific to genomes with k=51;
* sourmash is a nice one-stop-shop tool for doing this, but you could have gotten similar results by using other tools.

> * Next steps here could include mapping reads to the genomes we found, and/or doing functional analysis on the matching genes and genomes. We'll talk more about functional analysis this afternoon!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Next steps here could include mapping reads to the genomes we found, and/or doing functional analysis on the matching genes and genomes.
```
